# Build a React App that Suggests Novel Novels with a Python Graph

There are a lot of great resources for learning Data Science techniques out there. MOOCS, blogs, tutorials, and bootcamps are all great avenues for learning. Personally, I learn best by working on projects that I find interesting and engaging. Nothing motivates me more to push my level of understanding to new heights than by working on an intriguing problem. How do I identify new avenues that I can explore? Generally by reading other people's work!

This idea was first realized by reading Vicki Boykis' great [blog](https://vicki.substack.com/p/big-recsys-redux-recs-at-netflix) post about the changing nature of Netflix's recommendation engine. In short (sorry for the hack job, Vicki), gone are the days of minimizing the RMSE of a user's rating preferences with Matrix Factorization and Deep Learning. Recommendations are still partly an art form, with context, nuance, and design all playing a large part in providing a great experience to the user. In addition, the business value of a recommendation is not simply to provide the best content to the user. In the case of Netflix, it may be to provide the best _Netflix_ content to the user.

I had the great pleasure of attending [RecSys 2019](https://recsys.acm.org/recsys19/) in Copenhagen this year. The winner for [Best Paper](https://arxiv.org/abs/1907.06902) was one that was *not* a State of the Art Neural Network approach. Instead, it was a careful examination of previous, open source recommendation systems, open source datasets, and their actual performance in a head-to-head matchup. The results, you may ask? Simple models (Graph based, User/Item Nearest Neighbors, Top Popular items) nearly always outperform the best deep neural networks.